In this video We'll cover some IP network basics and when I say the basics I really mean just the very
basics and we're not going to give a full C cna a level class on routing and protocols and all of that
sort of stuff.
But I just want to give you some of the most basic concepts and that way as we kind of work our way
into more advanced topics and other videos like NSX and the distributed logical router you'll be able
to understand those concepts because you'll have a basic understanding of IP networking.
So let's take a look at our diagram here.
And in the diagram we can see we have two different networks.
And on the top we've got the network I'm calling it the tenth one that one does zero slash 24 network
and that is our IP network.
So that means on this network we have a splash 24 subnet mask.
That means that the first 24 bits are part of the network address and the remaining 8 bits or my 0.
That's part of the host range of IPs.
So based on that we can kind of ascertain here the range of IP addresses available is 10 1 1 0 through
turned out 1.1 to 55.
We typically do not use this first address turned out 1.1 0.
That's the address of our network and we don't use have not one not one 2:55 unless we have to do broadcasts.
So our actual usable range of IP addresses will be 10 that 1.1 one through 10 out 1.1 254.
And I've got these machines connected to the same switch could be a physical switch could be a virtual
switch.
Regardless I've got these machines on this network connected to the same switch and here's a letter
to domain right.
Here's a letter to network inner connecting devices that are on the same IP address range
well.
What happens when my machines that are on this network want to talk to devices that are on some other
network.
We're going to have to use something called our default gateway.
And in that case that's this router that we have pictured here.
So the router is going to act as our default gateway for our machines.
And again this is true if you have physical machines virtual machines it doesn't matter.
You'll go into the guest operating system.
Let's assume it's Windows.
You'll go into windows and you'll configure a default gateway for your machine.
And what that default gateway means is basically anything that's on some other network.
Anything that falls outside of this IP address range that traffic needs to be sent to the default gateway
so that it can be routed to other network.
We can't have machines from different networks on the same layer 2 domain.
We can't have virtual machines or physical machines on the same switching segment if they're on different
layer three networks.
So that's what we're going to use that default gateway for.
So when you think of that default gateway that configuration that you do when Windows basically all
you're saying is for any traffic that is on some network other than this network send that traffic to
my default gateway and the default gateway is a router.
The router works at Layer 3 of the same model.
So let's say for example we have a machine here 10 1.1 1.
And it goes in it sends some traffic towards 1 9 2 1 6 8 1 2 machine on the 1 9 2 1 6 8 1 0 network.
Well that traffic is going to be directed towards the default gateway and the default gateway will receive
that packet.
And here's what that packet looks like.
When the packet arrives at the router it will have a source and destination IP address and the router
will open up that packet and it will essentially analyze the contents of that packet and it will say
OK the source IP is coming from 10 not one not one not two the destination IP isn't $192 168 not one
not two and the router at this point will realize I've got an interface on that network.
I've got an interface on the one nine 2.1 six say not one not two network.
And so it'll for that packet towards that network where it can eventually reach the destination virtual
machine.
So what the router is essentially doing in our network here is its inter connecting multipole layer
to networks.
It knows how to get to each of those networks by using its routing table and is going to receive traffic
from one network and forward it to the appropriate network.
And so what the router will have is something called a routing table which I just mentioned.
And in this scenario we've got this router and it's connected directly to these two switches.
So let's assume it has a direct connection to these two ethernet switches the router is always going
to be aware of those directly connected networks will configure IP addresses on those router interfaces
and it will automatically be aware of those directly connected networks and it will build entries in
its routing table to reflect those networks.
So here's what our routing table will look like and it looks something like this will have interfaces
on the router and will have networks associated with those interfaces.
So for any packets that are bound for the 10.0 dot 1.0 network the router for those packets our interface
one and if those packets are bound for the 1 2 1 6 8 dot one does their own network.
Those packets will be forwarded out interface too.
Now this is really the most basic iteration of the routing table.
There is a lot of other ways that our routing table entries can be populated and updated.
We can use static routes we can use dynamic routing protocols but thats not really what I want to get
into here.
I just want to show you the basic concept of a router what its job is and what a routing table looks
like.
And we're not going to get into how to build a dynamic routing table or anything like that just yet.
One final item of review.
Just to kind of talk about our OS II model let's bring it back to the OS model.
Let's look at our Lares here.
So I have a machine that is physically connected to the switch that physical cable.
That's where one the physical cable between the switch and the router and this other switch and this
other router interface those are all my layer one connections my physical media and the actual physical
switch itself and the router itself.
Those interfaces that's all of my Lehre one components
at Layer 2.
I have MAC addresses ethernet network.
So when this machine 10.0 one want to send that packet towards its default gateway the IP addresses
weren't the only IP addresses on their There was also a source and destination MAC address.
That's my layer to addressing scheme.
So if we take a deeper look at that packet Let's drill down into the source and destination MAC and
the source and destination IP addresses to understand how ARE layer 2 and layer 3 addresses different.
Here's a more detailed look at that same packet that we looked at before.
So in this scenario again this virtual machine up here the 10.0 one not one not two is trying to communicate
with $192 168 dot 1.2.
And so because that destination is on a different note work what that source machine will do is it will
send the freight to the default gateway.
And so in this case the source Mac address is the mac address of this machine.
Let's call it Mac A.
The destination MAC is the MAC address of the router.
Let's call it Mac or one.
So one that either that frame gets sent out the router will receive it.
It'll analyze the source and destination MAC and a little determine add a layer to level.
This frame is bound for me.
I'm the destination MAC address.
At that point those source and destination MAC headers are gone.
There are discarded we don't need the Mac counters anymore because at this point the communication all
across our lair to network is complete.
So let's dispose of these.
And then at that point the router will analyze the layer three headers it will dig one layer deeper
it will see the source IP is 10 dot one dot to and it will see that the destination IP is 192 not 168.
Don't want to and the router will realize that's not me.
I'm not the destination IP and this packet is not bound for me.
It's bound for some other device on that 192 that 168.
Not one not two network.
So then it'll analyze its routing table and it will determine I've got an interface connected to that
network.
So what does this packet look like as it leaves the router and heads towards that destination machine.
Well the first thing that we notice is the source and destination IP don't change that part is not going
to change at all.
We still have the same source IP which is this machine up here and we still have the same destination
IP which is this machine down here.
So the three addresses don't change at all.
But from a layer to perspective the source of Mac as it leaves this router is now this interface on
the router.
And now the destination MAC is the MAC address of our receiving machine.
So what I want to illustrate here is that these Lehre to MAC addresses they're unique to their layer
2 segment.
That's the only place that those addresses are significant.
But when we saw frames flowing within this layer to domain up here those source and destination MAC
addresses were relevant as soon as that frame gets routed by a router to some other layer to network
those source and destination MAC addresses for Lapeer lose their significance and new source and destination
MAC addresses are appendant.
So what we see here is two ethernet domains.
Right we have one ethernet domain appear one ethernet domain down here and they are interconnected by
a layer 3 device a router.